---
layout:     post
title:      "Comorbid"
subtitle:   ""
date:       2015-11-28 16:00:00
author:     "ER"
header-img: "img/comorbid/Rocks_Contrast_Mask_Dark.jpg"
---

**Comorbid** - _relating to or denoting a medical condition that co-occurs with another._

What a word! It makes me think of an obese dead guy in a hospital gown sauntering after me wherever I go. 'Comorbid' adds a layer to the diagnosis by describing the relationship between my illnesses or “labels.” They “co-occur” but that is not how I see them, most specifically in terms of social stigma.

Labels certainly helped in the beginning. They engendered the “I’m not alone” state. Supplying some comfort that I was right - it wasn’t ok to feel like that. To know the doctor has seen this before and it can be treated. Labels are useful when dealing with doctors, they know what to do with you. (If you can find a doctor happy to work outside the labels - then you have a keeper! But that’s a different post!)

I was given two labels: Bipolar Disorder and Obsessive Compulsive Disorder. I first exhibited symptoms age fourteen but it took nearly a decade to get the labels.  Initially you want to tell everyone about your labels, to explain your odd behaviour, it wasn’t me, look it’s those two “labels” over there. My labels do not co-occur. Bipolar Disorder is very self-absorbed, dramatic and wants all the attention. OCD is happy to operate in the shadows.

Interestingly at parties as I felt the need to tell everyone about my labels, and to explain myself (OCD loves reassurance), I often found I only mentioned Bipolar Disorder.

It was just easier to talk about the energy of an elevated state than admitting the peculiarities of my obsessions and compulsions. I could tell friends all about the Russian poet I talked to in the park, who to this day I’m not sure was actually there, but I’d pull down my sleeves embarrassed by my cracked and bleeding hands, raw from over washing.

Bipolar Disorder felt like the cool kid, wild and creative. It brought chaos and that delicious feeling of anything can happen tonight. Of course they were hideous depths, not to mention dangerous mixed episodes, but Bipolar and its associated madness tapped into this creativity I adored – ideas falling over themselves for your attention.  I was therefore indifferent to the stigma of the madness of Bipolar – I had accepted it for better and for worse. Unlike OCD it felt much more a part of my personality – where did it end and I begin? You say I’m Bipolar, you do not say I’m OCD. You say I have OCD.

Also when I was in an elevated state, Bipolar dealt with OCD. This was glorious. It told OCD to relax, to chill, to forget checking and worrying, the gas is off, taps are off, the dog won’t choke to death while you’re out. (It is important to remember that when I was in a depressed state, the OCD had an absolute field day, kicking me in the head when even getting up for a pee seemed like a bridge too far.) At least some of the time Bipolar was my “friend” helping me out against OCD, giving me a break however brief and costly. I’m sure there are many of you out there who would take a break from your OCD, even for an hour, imagine the peace! 

When I talked about being Bipolar people could tap into that zany creative image readily available in popular culture. People would always name a writer, poet, artist or actor who was Bipolar. And I will admit there are days I do miss the creative side of it - the buzz, the thrill - instead I'm left getting frustrated at the pauses the lithium creates.

OCD offers nothing like that - no cultural reference for people to vibe off, no unadulterated glimpses of your mind set free.  OCD is just cruel; it’s a constant bare-knuckle fight. From the moment you open your eyes, it’s there with a jab. Sometimes it will even invade your dreams and you will wake up in the midst of a panic attack, unable to catch your breath in a dark room you can’t even recognise as your bedroom. Why would I tell anyone about that?

OCD is astoundingly misunderstood– there are aspects of it I am ashamed to talk about. And that’s what it is – shame. I don’t even have to go as far as others, out into the world and their stigma – it’s my own shame. Shame about what my mind forces me to think and do. It straps you to a chair, wrenches your eyes open and parades an ensemble of images in front you – not just any old image, it has scoured your own mind for the images that most upset and offend you. And then when you think you can’t take it anymore, it spits in your face and says, “Who are you possibly going to tell? These are your thoughts.” It is a form of abuse done to you by your own mind. How can you explain that at a party, over a glass of Presecco?

Don’t get me wrong, Bipolar mania and depression has its own implements of torture. However it is different as the destructive thoughts are more concerned with the self – I am useless, there is no escape etc which when repeated on a loop is also barbaric. Bipolar doesn’t employ the same relentless tactics of using what you fear most against you. OCD screams at you repeatedly that you’ve already done or will do one of the grotesque things you fear. Your thought process becomes so distorted you cannot tell real memories from fake ones. How do you possibly tell someone this happens to you? - Chronically!

This video by Mark Freeman illustrates this aspect of OCD brilliantly:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/prN6_Lt1VZg" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>



So this is where a label does help. These types of intrusive thoughts have been extensively documented as being part of OCD. It’s OCD, it’s not you!

Yet I still do not feel comfortable or safe talking about my OCD. I do not feel it will be understood. I find it hard to accept. And my compulsions do not make it any easier. “Ritual” feels like a nasty dirty word, a private act. I feel exposed if someone sees me doing one. It’s not quirky or creative. I feel like I am malfunctioning in front of them.  There is something latent, insidious about how OCD works on the brain, turning you into its puppet.

So it has become clear to me that I find it hard to accept the social stigma that comes with OCD, but not around Bipolar. I find it hard to engage people about OCD because people, including friends and family do not know what OCD means for me or what OCD is ultimately capable of. It is viewed as less of a threat than my Bipolar in their eyes and I think by society in general. If I do mention at a party that I have OCD, the response is “Oh yeah I’m a bit like that, crumbs on the table like totally freak me out!”

While it may seem heartening that people respond like this – "Don’t worry sure we are all a bit quirky" - it actually diminishes what OCD survivors have to cope with daily. No one will ever say they are a "bit Bipolar" to you and this is the appropriate response. So perhaps then the reason I don’t say I have OCD at parties is because I want to avoid having to listen to a list of everyone’s quirks? - “Sure I'm a bit OCD about...”

The problem with OCD is that it is incorrectly "labelled" in society. My "label" does not match their understanding of OCD. The disparity is so great that you become overwhelmed - how do I even begin to explain? Never mind moving on to more enlightening discussions with cultural references!

And worryingly how do you begin to accept your illness publicly - come to terms with it in that final domain - if there is no common understanding of what OCD is? When contrasted with Bipolar it appears the first barrier for me discussing OCD is people equating my OCD with their personality traits.

For as the party makes its way through the night, people inevitably tell you more and more, their worries, maybe some ritual or compulsion will be whispered. “You should try therapy or maybe meditation,” I say to them and the response, “What? Me? Jesus I’m not crazy.”

_Please note – this is an opinion piece. The views here do not attempt to represent the symptoms or suffering of either life-altering illness. These are merely reflections and observations based on the author’s personal experience around the issue of social stigma and mental illness._